Annexure-7.1
(Enclosure to Item No.7)
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
Office of the Dean (Student Affairs)
Campus Code of Conduct
1. Basic policy governing student life
a) Every student has the right to all the advantages, prestige and
honours accruing to a student of this Institute.
b) The Institute will endeavour to provide a living and learning
environment in which the student can meet her/his academic goals.
The Institute has the responsibility of providing the student with a
clear understanding of its academic requirements which are generally
set forth in writing in the Institute’s brochures, rules, and regulations.
c) The Institute will determine when its rules are violated and to
determine the appropriate course of action. By enrolling in the
Institute, the student accepts the responsibility of compliance with
the Institute rules and regulations and is expected at all times to
recognise constituted authority, to respect the rights of others, and to
protect private and public property.
2. Administration
a) The Dean of Student Affairs (DoSA), shall be responsible to the
Director for the supervision and coordination of all student activities in
the Institute.
b) Any complaints filed with legal authorities on behalf of The Institute
as a result of violation of the Penal Code will be filed by the Security
Officer of the Institute.
c) Disciplinary policies shall be administered by the DoSA, or his/her
appointed committee.
d) Disciplinary action will be administered by the Dean of Student
Affairs.
3. Institute Disciplinary System:
The Disciplinary System of the Institute as it relates to student conduct
has the following components and levels :
a) Complainant: The complainant can be a student, security officer,
warden, hostel manager, or any other person.
b) Administrative Hearing: Administrative hearing will be handled
through the office of the DoSA. Students are generally summoned to
that office after information has been received from the Security
Office or on a complaint concerning the conduct of a Student. The
administrative hearing in hostel-related matters, unless escalated to
the institute committee, shall be handled by the office of the
respective warden. The proceedings/minutes of the DAC meetings are
confidential for the parties not involved.
c) Hostel-related matters: Hostel-related matters are generally dealt
with by a Warden Disciplinary Action Committee (wDAC) appointed by
the Associate Dean of Student Affairs. The complaints from security
are generally forwarded to this committee. Inter-hostel related
matters are also dealt with by this committee.
Depending on the nature of the complaint, one or more of the
following is done by wDAC:
i Fines will be imposed on the students involved. This may
include monetary fine, hostel suspension, hostel expulsion
depending on the nature of the offense. The committee may
recommend community service on a case-to-case basis.
ii An enquiry committee or Fact Finding Committee may be
constituted by A/Dean(SA) depending on the nature of the
complaint. The report of FFC shall be forwarded to wDAC
through A/Dean(SA). The FFC report is kept confidential, but
the contents of the report shall be shared with the parties
involved during the meeting.
iii In either of the cases above, students will be called for the
wDAC meeting and will be given a chance to explain their
actions.
iv It is the responsibility of the student to attend the meeting
without fail. If the student fails to attend the meeting, then
he/she shall be notified of the decision taken by the wDAC.
v wDAC may refer some cases to the institute-level DAC.
d) Academic Matters: Academic misconduct cases are dealt with by
departments (D-DAC) and/or the Academic DAC (A-DAC).
Department-level DACs are chaired by the Head of the respective
academic unit, and A-DAC is chaired by the Dean (Academic
Programmes). The procedure followed in case of academic
malpractices is available on the academic office website.
e) Institute level DAC: is the committee constituted by the Director and
chaired by DoSA.
f) Student representation: General Secretary (Hostel Affairs) is part of
the institute-level DAC and wDAC. The General Secretary Academic
Affairs (GSAA) (UG) and GSAA (PG) are part of the A-DAC.
4. Discipline Code:
a) Violations of criminal statutes may result in appropriate Institute
disciplinary action.
b) Any complaints filed with legal authorities on behalf of The Institute
as a result of a violation of the Penal Code will be filed by the Security
Officer of the Institute.
c) Violations of institute rules and regulations (Annexure 7.2) shall result
in disciplinary action as defined in Section 5.
5. Disciplinary Action:
Disciplinary action may consist of the following:
a) Monetary fine: A monetary fine may be imposed on the student.
Repeat offenders shall be suspended from the hostel/institute.
b) Suspension: Separation of the student from the Institute for a definite
period of time. Student shall not enter the campus during the period
of suspension.
c) Expulsion: Separation of the student from the Institute whereby the
student is not eligible for readmission to the Institute. Student shall
not enter the campus.
d) Hostel Suspension: Student shall be suspended/expelled from the
hostel. Such a student shall not be allowed to enter any hostel during
the period of suspension.
e) Hostel Expulsion: Student shall be expelled from the hostel. Such a
student shall not be allowed to enter any hostel.
f) Compensation: A payment for financial injury to an innocent party in
cases involving theft, destruction of property, or deception. The
assessed costs to be paid may be in addition to the receipt of any of
the above penalties.
6. Rights in Disciplinary Actions and Appeal:
Students who are liable to disciplinary action of the institute level DAC
may file an appeal with the Director. The decision of the Director shall be
final. For decisions on other disciplinary committees, students may file an
appeal with the Dean of Student Affairs.
6.1 Grounds for appeal
An appeal will be considered if the candidate can make a case for one
or more of the following
a) Procedural error
b) New evidence that was not available during the original
investigation
c) Bias or discrimination during the process
6.2 Timeframe for filing
a) The appeal must be filed within 10 working days after receiving
the disciplinary decision.
b) Later appeals shall not be considered unless there are
exceptional circumstances
6.3 Appeal filing process
a) Students shall submit a written appeal letter with all supporting
evidence or documents.
6.4 Review process
a) A committee appointed by the Director shall review the appeal
applications.
b) The committee shall examine all documents including previous
documents, check if the procedures were followed while making
previous decisions.
6.5 Outcome of the Appeal
The appeal decision may:
a) Uphold the original disciplinary action
b) Modify the disciplinary action (e.g. reduce the penalty)
c) Overturn the disciplinary action entirely
The decision of the appeals committee is final and binding. No
further appeals will be entertained.
6.6 Notification of the decision
a) The individual will receive the outcome in writing.
b) The decision shall include summary of findings
c) Final decision
d) Any further
Annexure -7.2
(Enclosure to Item No. 7)
Rules and Regulations
1. Conduct and Behavior Rules
a. All residents shall be courteous and fair with everyone, inside and outside
the hostel.
b. Students shall not participate in any anti-national, anti-social, or
undesirable activities.
c. Participation in any act or threat - whether physical or psychological -
intended to subject a student or any individual to physical pain,
discomfort, indignity, humiliation, or mental distress, regardless of the
time or setting or medium, is strictly prohibited.
d. Participation in or promoting any disruptive activity or disrupting a lawful
assembly on the campus is strictly prohibited.
e. Participation or encouraging disturbances in campus venues such as
dining halls, lounges, classrooms, lecture theatre, convocation hall, etc., is
strictly prohibited.
f. Speeches, plays, music, or any other activities that disturb the peace of
the hostel/academic/campus environment are strictly prohibited.
g. Only activities approved by the DoSA office will be permitted.
2. Identification and Entry Rules
a. All students shall carry their ORIGINAL institute identity cards
(HARDCOPY) and produce them on demand by institute officials and/or
authorized individuals. Soft copies or PDFs will not be accepted.
b. If you lose your ID card, report to the security office immediately and
collect a new ID card.
c. ID cards are valid only if registered for the current semester, irrespective
of the validity date mentioned on the card. Entry may be denied if the ID
card is invalid.
d. Fraudulent use of student ID cards is prohibited.
e. Hosts must deposit their original IITB ID cards with hostel security and
sign the visitor book.
f. All students should adhere to hostel rules and regulations. Click here to
access them.
g. Prior approval to invite guest(s) inside the campus must be taken from
the authorized officials.
3. Prohibited Activities and Items
a. Ragging is a criminal offense and will be dealt with as per UGC regulations
and Supreme Court rulings, leading to penalties including possible
expulsion from the Institute.
b. Smoking in any form is banned on campus.
c. Possession or consumption of alcohol, tobacco, banned substances, or
narcotic drugs on campus is prohibited.
d. Manufacturing, possessing, selling, or using dangerous drugs is forbidden.
e. Possession of firearms, explosives, or any other weapons on campus is
prohibited.
f. Public Screening of pirated or unauthorized movies is prohibited.
g. Distribution of posters, leaflets, or pamphlets anywhere on campus
without permission from the competent authorities is not allowed.
4. Motorized Vehicle and Campus Facilities Rules
a. Students availing hostel facilities are not allowed to use motorized
vehicles on campus.
b. PwD students must obtain written approval from the DoSA office to use
special vehicles for commuting.
c. Married research scholars or day scholars must obtain written approval
from the DoSA office to use two/four wheelers for commuting.
d. Students shall not enter non-hostel residential buildings.
e. Unauthorized possession of any key, equipment, or material belonging to
the Institute, Department, or Hostel is prohibited.
f. Defacing or destroying any property, including hostel rooms, belonging to
the Institute or others is strictly forbidden.
5. Integrity and Discipline
a. Providing false information to the Institute, withholding
material/information, or falsifying records to gain advantage is forbidden.
b. Disobedience of orders issued by Institute officials or making unauthorized
statements is prohibited.
c. Misrepresenting the truth during Institute hearings is forbidden.
d. Aiding, abetting, conspiring, hiring, or being an accessory to any act
violating criminal statutes or Institute rules is prohibited.
e. Fines and disciplinary punishments awarded by various disciplinary
committees such as WDAC, DAC, ADAC, D-ADAC, e-DAC etc must be
adhered to within the specified timeframe.
6. Communication and Media
a. Students are prohibited from speaking to the press, media persons, or
any external agencies on any matters related to the Institute without prior
approval from authorized Institute officials.
b. Unauthorized disclosure of Institute information to the media or public is
strictly forbidden.
c. All media inquiries or requests must be referred to the Institute’s
designated spokesperson or office.
7. Social Media
a. Students must not post, share, or disseminate any false information
related to the Institute on social media platforms.
b. Unauthorized sharing of confidential or sensitive Institute matters on
social media is strictly prohibited.
c. Students should exercise caution and refrain from posting content that
could harm the reputation or interests of the Institute and fellow students.
Any communication on social media regarding Institute affairs must
adhere to Institute guidelines and policies.