Indian Institute of Technology Bombay – Infrastructure Details
Student Hostels
IIT Bombay is well known for its extensive residential facilities. Students have the luxury of
being located in Powai, one of the finer suburbs of Mumbai, outside the bustle of the city, yet
not far from the attractions of the city during weekends. Staying in the campus is particularly
attractive because resident students have access to several facilities.
HOSTEL CO-ORDINATING UNIT (HCU)
OVERVIEW
The Hostel Co-Ordinating unit is located on the minus one level of the Main Building of IIT
Bombay. The HCU has the role of managing and Co-ordinating the activities of 17 Hostels of
campus (hostels no-1 to16, hostel no -18 and Tansa).The HCU also manages the workforce
under the centralized hostel management system.
The hostel co-ordinating unit looks after following areas:
 Co-ordinating the activities of various Hostels in matters of common
Interest and common policy.
Majority of the hostels have a private caterer serving in their messes. HCU publishes the
tender for selection of caterers in various hostels and conducts
The process of selection. The hostel wardens’ council decides and formulates various
policies, such as policy of guest booking, policy for selection of caterers to run the messes
and canteens in all the hostels. These common policy are implemented by HCU.
 Issuing no-dues certificates to graduate students
Every graduating students is required to obtain a no dues certificate from the respective hostel
before approaching the hostel co-ordinating unit for no dues certificates. The form of no dues
certificates is available in HCU.
 Allotment of hostels for various conference, seminars, workshops
And other events.
Conferences, Seminars, Workshops, symposiums etc. are held in the institute at regular
intervals. The participants in these events are accommodated in various hostels on campus.
For hostel rules the organizers of the event ae required to send request to the associated
Den(SA), well in advanced and a Confirmation will be given about two weeks before the date
of event.
 Allotments of Hostels rooms to interns.
Hostels rooms are allotted to external summer intern and also to the interns during winter
vacation provided they are working with a faculty member from IIT Bombay. The interns are
required to complete the formalities such as registration, payment of internship fees etc. with
the academic office and thereafter visit HCU (only during working hours) for allotment of
accommodation. Rooms to interns are always provided on sharing bases. The interns are
advised not to approach for extension of tenure of stay in hostels.
 Allotments of Hostels rooms to the candidates visiting IIT for various Interviews for
admission school the academic programme of the institute (M.Tech., M.Sc., Ph.D. etc.)
Hostels rooms are allotted to the candidates appearing for written test interviews, for
admission to various academic programme of Institute. The allotment is made for a short
duration of 3-4 days. An online portal is activated usually before 10-20 days, before the dates
of written test and interviews details instruction are published at the time of release a portal.
 Handling HR function in respect of CHMS workers.
There are about 125 regular staff employed under the centralized hostel management system.
HCU maintained all service records in case of these employees. HCU also process there
retirement, final payments etc.
 Allotment of Guest accommodation to the parents, whose children are Studying in this
institute.
Guest accommodation for parents visiting their children’s, studying in IIT Bombay, is
provided subject to following norms;
1. Accommodation is provided for period one week only.
2. Shared accommodation is provided in any of the hostels only if available.
3. Accommodation is provided for Father, Mother, Husband/Wife, Siblings (only if
accompanied by at least one of the parents), Other relatives (only if accompanied by at
least one of the parents)
 Allotment of hostels to the existing and newly join students.
The students should be staying on campus in legibility manner during the stay
EXITING STUDENTS
During the second year onwards students are shifted to other hostel. The allocation is again
based on their department and no change in allocation is allowed. Towards end of each
semester the students are allowed to make a request for retension of room during the vacaton
only limited number of such requeat are allowed based on genuine requirement.(Attending
summer course, final year project etc)
Accomodation also be provided no legal guardians in expectational cases and medical
emergencies certified writing by the IIT hospital or students wellness center for an period of
more then one week
Allotment of hostel to newly joinng students
The process of allocation of hostel to the newly joined students is as under:
 The list of stuents joining the institute is recived from the academic section of the institute
and based on the availability of various hostels the students are randomly allocated rooms
in vaio hostels.
 In normal course any change in the room alogation is not allowed.
 The allogation are usually made keeping in mind the fact hat clubing same departmemt
student at one place them to afficieeeetly manage there departments activites such as
proects.
 Usualy all the first year student for al academic programe (UG,PG) are allowted to the
same hostel.
 Only shared acommodation is alloted during the first year of any according
programme(B.Tech,M.Tech,P.hd,M.Phil,B.Des,m.Des,etc)
The folowing furniture is provided in the room:
 bed
 chair
 studytable
 cupboard
IN the following iteams are required to be bought by the students at their own expenses.
 Buckets
 Mattress
 Bedsheets
 Pillow
Any other items of personal use except electrical items, that may be needed
IIT Bombay boasts 17 hostels (hostels no-1 to16, hostel no -18 and Tansa); you can access
the links below to learn more about each of these hostels.
 Hostel1
 Hostel2
 Hostel3
 Hostel4
 Hostel5
 Hostel6
 Hostel7
 Hostel8
 Hostel9
 Hostel10
 Hostel11
 Hostel12
 Hostel13
 Hostel14
 Tansa
Library
IIT Bombay’s Central Library is like IIT Bombay – user-focused, innovative, and excellence
driven. The library has always benefited from the institutes’ culture, is pioneer in adopting
new technology, and is far ahead than many libraries in the country. Central Library manages
knowledge, both in print and digital formats, ensures seamless discovery and access to these
scholarly resources, and provides faculty, students, and staff with professional support to
find, evaluate, manage, and use such resources. It provides high-quality ambiance for both
reflective and collaborative work and study. Its collection of about 4.40 lakh items is used by
more than 11000 members and others . The library extensively uses social media for
improved communication and interaction and has created a blog to post current and
interesting information and news items. Users can also follow us on the facebook and twitter.
This is the reflection of library’s continuous engagement with its users as a valuable partner
in their learning and research.
Renovation Plans
IIT Bombay Library has planned for a major renovation of its building infrastructure and
other facilities including addition of a new floor. The work has already started and is
scheduled to be completed within a year. The plan envisages complete face lift of its entrance
and circulation area, with a beautiful lobby and exhibit area, reorganization of reference and
periodicals reading halls, providing a variety of users spaces for individual and group studies,
creation of digital knowledge lab and language lab, improved staff work areas and a large
reading hall open for 24×7. When completed, the library will have the ambiance and facilities
comparable with the best libraries.